This code challenge follows directly from the previous video, so make sure you've gone through that
video and the code before starting this one.
What we are going to do here is follow up on the approach that I showed you in the previous video,
and extend it by adding some additional analyses, and also by analyzing how the characteristics change
over the different layers.
Exercise one is mostly copy paste from the code for the previous video, although there are a few changes
and a few things that you can leave out.
And this is basically a list of what you want to accomplish here.
So one difference is that you want to use GPT two XL.
So the large the extra large version of GPT two.
So make sure that the size and shape parameters in your code are soft coded so that they will work with
the bigger model, which has more layers and more parameters.
Now you can connect to a GPU if you want, although there isn't a whole lot of feedforward processing
to do in this code challenge.
So I actually just ran the whole thing on the CPU and it's fine.
By the end of this exercise, you want to have all the activations for the targets and non-target tokens
and using the same sentences from the previous video.
And then you also want to have that upper triangular matrix mask from which we can extract the individual
submatrices and the interactions across the different attention Submatrices.
Now you do not need to calculate cosine similarity or correlation or any other analyses in this exercise.
We'll get to that later.
Here everything is just about getting the code set up for later exercises.
Also, a brief reminder that the target token in the full sentence is actually space her, not just
her, with no preceding space.
Okay, so now you can pause the video and switch to code.
I will switch to Python very briefly, just to give a quick overview of the code for this exercise.
So some libraries to import.
Here you can see I'm importing Gpt2 Excel.
This is just copied over.
In fact all of the Tokenizers for GPT two are the same.
All the variants use exactly the same tokenizer.
And I'm switching the model to eval mode.
And this is just a convenience variable for the number of embeddings dimensions.
So I don't need to keep writing out all of these characters multiple times throughout the code.
Okay, this is the same as what you've seen before.
I'm hooking the, uh, Q vk matrices.
And yeah using attention.
C attention.
And the output of that linear transformation is the q, v and k matrices, or the vectors all concatenated
together into one wide matrix, which I will later on separate.
Let's see.
Here are the sentences literally copy pasted from earlier.
Uh, tokenize push through the model.
Yeah, this takes around a minute on the CPU.
It's really not so bad and we don't need the GPU for anything else.
This is the only thing we're going to do here.
And then this is the code to create that matrix mask that I explained in the previous video.
So you can see all the same code from the or mostly the same code from the previous video.
Uh, and I'm just leaving out some printing and, and visualizations and so on.
We are still not quite ready to do the analyses.
First, I want you to write a function that will get layer specific activations.
The only tricky part is that you need to find the index of the target token in each sentence, because
the word her can appear in different positions in different sentences.
So the idea of this function is that you're going to use it in the next exercise to get all the activations
from one layer, so that and that is the layer index that you input into this function.
Now on the one hand, you can literally copy paste all of this code from the previous video.
But on the other hand, because this is the only thing you need to do for exercise two I strongly recommend
coding this one from scratch just based on these comments here, without copy pasting from the previous
video.
This is a great opportunity to make sure that you're comfortable with finding a target token in a short
sequence and working with activations vectors.
Okay, so now you should pause the video and again I will switch to code, but just briefly to make
sure that this syntax is clear.
So inside this function I initialize a variable.
So we have the length.
So the number of sentences and then the number of embeddings dimensions times three.
Of course that's for the concatenation of the queries the keys and the values vectors.
And then I loop over sentences.
And yeah.
Also as a reminder of stuff I've said in the previous video, if you have the sequences, if the batches
are set up such that the target word is in the same position, the same ordinal position, for example,
let's say the target token that you want to grab the activations for is always the final token in the
sequence.
You do not actually need a for loop here.
You can just index something you know it would be something like this.
All the sentences, the final token and then all of the dimensions.
But, uh, yeah, the, uh, the location of the target token can be different in every sentence.
Okay.
And then this is for the target.
And this is for the comparison, the non-target.
These are whatever token or word happens to come before the word her in each of these sentences.
This exercise is a big one.
What you're going to do is create a for loop that loops over all of the layers and calculates and organizes
a bunch of analyses from within each layer.
There's no visualization here that comes in the next two exercises.
But here is the list of things to do for exercise three.
So here we have a big loop over all the layers.
And first you call the function that you wrote in exercise two.
This will give you tensors for all the activations for the targets and for the non targets.
The next thing to do is get the variances over all of the targets and averaged within each attention
submatrix.
So to be clear for this piece of the code, here you have 54 activation values for each neuron.
Then you calculate the variance across all of those 54 neurons.
That's going to give you 1600.
So 1600 variance values corresponding to 1600 neurons query neurons and 1600 because this is GPT two
XL.
Of course that number would be 768.
In the small version, then you average across all of those 1600 variance values to get one number corresponding
to the average of the token activation variances from the cue population.
Then all this stuff that I just described that was for the query neuron.
So then you repeat that for the keys and you repeat that for the values.
So that means you're going to get three numbers from each layer.
And then you repeat that analysis for the targets and for the non targets.
So in fact it's actually six numbers per layer.
Okay.
The interpretation of this result is that if the model processes the word her in exactly the same way
in every sentence, then the variance will be basically zero.
And the larger the variance, the more the preceding context changes how the model processes the target
word her.
And of course, that might change across the different layers of the model, the different transformer
blocks.
Okay.
So that's for the variances.
For the means you do exactly the same procedure, except you get the average activation value instead
of the variance over all of the tokens.
The next thing to do is to calculate cosine similarities across all 5000 neurons in q, k, and v separately
for the targets and the non targets.
Now this we did in the previous video.
Once you have those big cosine similarity matrices, you can then apply the matrix mask that you created
in exercise one And isolate all of the cosine similarities within each of the three matrices and across
all the pairs of matrices.
And then you can make histograms again.
That is the same as what we did in the previous video.
You can feel free to copy and modify or rewrite from scratch if you'd like a bigger challenge.
Okay, so I hope that all makes sense.
There's a lot of work to do here.
And this for loop actually gets pretty long once you fill in all of this code.
But I believe in you.
I know you can do it.
So pause the video and get to work.
And now I will show my solution.
So here we are in this very long code cell.
There's really it gets really quite long.
Okay.
So in the very beginning I'm initializing lots and lots of stuff.
Now just a little helpful tip about coding.
What I often do is initialize Later.
So I will start writing code.
And then as I'm writing the code before I actually run the code, I'm starting to write the code.
Uh, and then I think about how big does this matrix need to be?
And then I can come up to the top of the code cell and then initialize it and so on.
Now a lot of these are basically the same.
They all get initialized to the same size, which is the number of layers, the number of transformer
blocks by the number of edges.
So this is the uh the histogram values I call it y for the histogram heights, the number of edges,
the number of boundaries minus one.
Okay.
So all of those get initialized.
And then here I have the initializations for the matrices of all of the variances and all of the means.
So that's two by layers by three.
The two corresponds to the target versus non-target.
The layers is yeah the number of transformer blocks, and the three corresponds to the three attention
sub matrices.
Now there are some arbitrary and just like personal preference choices to make in these kinds of analyses.
For example, if you chose to set up these matrices like this, to have it be layers by target or non-target,
by, uh, by sub matrix, that's completely fine as long as your code is all internally consistent,
it's totally fine.
If you wanted to break this up into two matrices like you can see here, I'm separating this into target
and non-target.
So you could also do that here.
And then you would just have something like this also completely fine.
And these things if you, you know, if you want to just uh, you could initialize these to be for target
and non I mean some of this is if I would start writing this code again from scratch, I'd probably
initialize some of these variables to be different sizes anyway.
Now here is the main for loop.
Okay, so this is just calling the function from the previous exercise that we wrote to extract all
the activations.
Here I am getting the variances.
So all of the variances across the first dimension that corresponds to the different sentences.
So the 54 presentations of the word her.
And so I get the variances there.
And then I'm averaging over the variances for the first third and for the middle third and for the later
third.
Now you also know how to use this function called split which is a method that operates on PyTorch tensors.
So if you want to so if you chose to torch.cat to convert this into a tensor and use split and putting
the, uh, you know, all the parameters in here, that's totally great.
That's totally fine.
And then, yeah, maybe you find that a little bit easier for this stuff here.
All right.
Uh, let me see.
Okay.
So that is for the variances.
Here's for the means.
This code is exactly the same as this code.
The only difference is that here I'm calculating the mean.
And here I'm calculating the variance.
By the way, in case you are curious why I said to calculate variance instead of standard deviation,
the variance is the standard deviation squared.
So that means the variance can kind of highlight the differences between different groupings a little
bit better because the the numbers are squared.
So they just get bigger.
It's just a little bit easier to make separations between different groups.
Okay.
Uh let's see here is calculating all to all cosine similarity for the targets and non targets.
And here I am extracting the specific submatrices uh exactly as I showed before.
Okay, so now that we have all of these cosine similarities.
Now I'm generating the histograms and you can see it's very similar to the previous video.
And also it's just a lot of copy pasting.
So you you know the hardest part of coding this particular exercise I think is just making sure you
are changing all of the variables correctly.
So it's a good idea to go through these.
And also what I often do is if you click on one variable, all the other variables that have exactly
the same spelling, you can see that they get this kind of background light blue highlight.
So this is actually good.
Let's say you made a typo.
You forgot to change this.
So now when I click on this one I can see that this variable also lights up.
This also gets highlighted which is incorrect.
So it's good to do that.
And what you want to confirm here is that this variable doesn't get highlighted anywhere else, indicating
that I'm only using it here.
Now we're starting to get to some cool visualizations.
I think some of these curves will look familiar to you from the previous video.
Remember that in the previous video we focused on just one layer and we just used the small version
of GPT two.
So here now we have one line per layer and it's a bigger model.
But the visualization is basically the same.
So you created the histograms of cosine similarities in the previous exercise.
So now you don't have any new analyses to run.
You're just visualizing the analyses that you completed in the previous exercise.
So the line color in these plots corresponds to the layers.
And that you see in the color axis here on the right.
It is really striking to see this smooth transition from the cosine similarities being extreme and large
in magnitude towards shifting to zero as we get deeper into the model.
Now, the reason why that happens is that in the early layers, the model is actually still processing
the word her, and the word her is the same for all of the activations that these data come from.
But the deeper we get into the model, the more the tokens shift from being about the current token
to being about predicting the subsequent token.
And every sentence in this data set has a unique context.
So the set of tokens that the processing shifts towards is going to be different for each sentence,
which means that the cosine similarities will be reduced, which means that the distributions will shift
more towards zero.
So you can visualize every layer as a line with a different color like this.
And you can also make images of the distributions like this.
So what you're looking at now these two images is the same as these two line plots.
But now every line in this plot is a row in this image.
And the color in the image corresponds to the y axis height in the line plots.
Now, both of these ways of visualizing are really interesting and complementary.
They technically show identical data, but I think you get different kinds of information more easily
from one or the other plot.
So you can try both and see what you think.
I really enjoy making these kinds of visualizations and I hope that you do too.
Anyway, now I will switch to the code and show my solution and discuss the results in a little bit
more detail.
The plotting code here is only slightly more complicated than the code from the previous video.
In fact, you can copy the plotting code from the previous video and just, you know, put it inside
a for loop.
If you want to get these colors to look really nice and fancy, then you can try doing something like
this.
You can add this.
Of course, if you want to color just using the built in color chooser from Python, that's also fine.
Okay, so let's see, I don't have a whole lot to say.
Uh, you've seen me use this kind of scheme before where I color the different lines and then generate
a color bar that maps the color onto the layer number.
So feel free to copy that and modify it.
You can use different color maps.
I like this plasma.
Sometimes I do plasma R for plasma reverse that you see in uh.
Wait, sorry.
I also need to change this one.
Oh yeah.
Well oops.
Because it's in a loop.
I can't really change all of them.
Uh, okay.
I would have to change all of them or none of them.
But anyway, just showing you that you can reverse the, uh, color order.
So let me switch that back to plasma and this back to plasma.
So basically if you want to reverse the color map, you have to reverse it on all of them.
Okay.
Anyway, uh, let's see what we can see.
So as I already explained in the slides, essentially we see a shift in the distributions of cosine
similarities from being more towards the extreme with, uh, earlier layers.
So closer to the input, that's where the model is processing each token.
And as you go deeper into the model, more towards the output of the model.
Now the model is shifting its processing towards trying to predict what is the next token going to be.
Now the next token depends not just on the word her, but on all the other words that preceded the word
her.
And that is different for every sentence in this batch.
And so therefore, we expect this kind of shift into the, uh, into smaller cosine similarities.
As you also know from the previous video, from the end of the previous video, a lot of these, uh,
tails of the distributions here are actually attributable to average offsets to mean offsets in the
attention vectors that are driving the cosine similarity, similarity values to the extreme.
So you can see that those vectors are also shifting closer to each other in their average values or
their distributional shifts.
The other part of this exercise was to show the images.
And that's what I do here.
It's all the same data that I'm plotting above.
Uh, I'm just showing using I am show now some of these like the maximum value here.
This is a bit arbitrary.
Often what ends up happening is you pick one value here, and then you look at the plot and you say,
whoa, this is like completely, completely saturated.
So let's try, you know, something much, much bigger.
And you just kind of iterate through this procedure several times and then, uh, yeah, you will eventually
find some value that seems to work.
That said, these are non-normalized counts.
If you would transform these into density estimates, for example, then it would be a little bit easier
to specify a value a priori.
But yeah, I mean, in general it's sometimes a little bit tricky to find these colors.
Another option you can do is to pick the color based on the empirical maximum value.
Now that sometimes works, but sometimes doesn't work.
You can also try picking the max and scaling it down.
So say for example 70% of the maximum value.
That still doesn't work.
Yeah, it's very tricky to set these color limits, because you will find that what you think is a really
good number for one data set is just not going to work for another data set.
In this case we have some really extreme values.
And so that's why it's hard to get this color scheme to work.
Anyway, as long as you have the color bars indicated with some explanation of what the color maps onto,
it's totally fine.
There's nothing wrong with arbitrary color scaling.
And finally, we have exercise five, where you will visualize the means and the variances.
Here you can make four scatterplots.
You can see that these scatter plots have the layer on the x axis and three different markers for the
query the keys and the values vectors.
So what you plot here are the average activations for the targets and the non-targets.
And then down here we have for the average variances again for targets and non-targets.
Obviously I'm not showing you the results here because I want you to create this plot and interpret
it yourself.
But what you want to look for here are any kinds of patterns over the laminar dimension.
So over the x axis for example, are the means or the variances pretty steady.
As you go deeper into the model, do they increase?
Do they decrease some weird nonlinear trends?
Are there any noticeable differences between the different matrices?
Remember from earlier in the course that the Q and k vectors are fairly similar to each other, in that
they combine to determine the probability that they're corresponding tokens get emphasized in the attention
sublayer, whereas the V vectors.
So the value vectors, that's what carries the actual information that gets weighted by the softmax.
And then that is what gets passed on to the next layer, the MLP subblock.
This is the last exercise in this code challenge, and I hope you enjoy working your way through it.
And now I will switch to code.
The code here is fairly straightforward, especially if you ignore all of this stuff, which is just
making the plots look a little bit nicer.
Really, all I'm doing is plotting the means across the three different matrices, and for the targets
and non-targets.
It's that simple.
Okay, so let's have a look at the means for the targets.
The non-targets we see the means are generally close to zero.
Remember these are averages across a lot of, you know, the 54 different presentations of the word
her and also the 1600 different neurons within each of these submatrices.
So the means being close to zero does not mean that the mean of any given q vector, for example, is
not, uh, is also must be zero.
So you could actually have some diversity in the averages, but at the population level the averages
are pretty close to zero.
And then yeah of course this is for targets.
So it's exactly the same word in every case.
And here we have the non-targets where you really see this consistent distributional shift, especially
as you get towards the middle part of the model where the model is starting to shift from processing
the local features to processing more global features about the entire sentence or the whole sequence.
Okay, so that's for the means.
Now here we have the same plot but for the variances.
And now this one is super interesting, especially here with the targets.
You see that the variances across all three of these attention submatrices start off very small, really
close to zero, and then they start increasing kind of linearly, almost monotonically until you get
towards the very end.
And then you really start to see shifts between the different, uh, divergence across the different
submatrices of attention.
And again, you know, it's the same basic interpretation at the kind of, you know, bird's eye view
of a LM, that what's happening is here.
The model is processing the word her.
And, you know, it's just processing that individual token.
And the later you get in the layer, the more information, the more context information and predictive
information about the subsequent token gets packed on to these embeddings vectors.
So that means they're starting to diverge.
They get more and more distinct from each other.
And for the non-targets, it's even higher because you have both token level differences and also sequence
level differences.
So they're the variance is just a higher consistently throughout.
I hope you enjoyed this code challenge.
I like these kinds of large scaled zoom out analyses, because I think that they really help provide
some background context for the general flow of information in an LLM.
On the other hand, it's also fair to criticize these kinds of approaches by saying that they do not
really reveal a lot of very specific insights into how llms work, but these kinds of zoomed out characteristics
also tend to be more reproducible, which is a pretty comforting thought in my opinion.